Genome Biology
Harle et al. Genome Biology             
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-025-03737-w
RESEARCH
Open Access
A compendium of synthetic lethal gene pairs 
defined by extensive combinatorial pan-cancer 
CRISPR screening
Victoria Harle1, Victoria Offord1, Birkan Gökbağ2, Lazaros Fotopoulos3, Thomas Williams3, Diana Alexander1, 
Ishan Mehta1, Nicola A. Thompson1, Rebeca Olvera‑León1, Stefan Peidli4, Vivek Iyer1, Emanuel Gonçalves1,5,6, 
Narod Kebabci7,8,9, Barbara De Kegel7,8, Joris van de Haar10, Lang Li2, Colm J. Ryan7,8 and David J. Adams1* 
*Correspondence:   
da1@sanger.ac.uk
1Wellcome Sanger Institute, 
Wellcome Trust Genome 
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK
2 Department of Biomedical 
Informatics, The Ohio State 
University, College of Medicine, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
3 Centre for Gene Therapy 
and Regenerative Medicine, 
King’s College London, 28Th 
Floor, Tower Wing, Guy’s Hospital, 
Great Maze Pond, London, UK
4 European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory (EMBL), Meyerhofstr. 
1 69117, Heidelberg, Germany
5
 Instituto Superior Técnico 
(IST), Universidade de Lisboa, 
1049‑001 Lisbon, Portugal
6 INESC‑ID, 1000‑029 Lisbon, 
Portugal
7 Conway Institute and School 
of Computer Science, University 
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
8 Systems Biology Ireland, 
University College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland
9 Science Foundation Ireland 
(SFI) Centre for Research Training 
in Genomics Data Science, 
University College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland
10 The Netherlands Cancer 
Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 
CX Amsterdam, Netherlands
Abstract 
Background: Synthetic lethal interactions are attractive therapeutic candidates 
as they enable selective targeting of cancer cells in which somatic alterations have 
disrupted one member of a synthetic lethal gene pair while leaving normal tissues 
untouched, thus minimising off‑target toxicity. Despite this potential, the number 
of well‑established and validated synthetic lethal gene pairs is modest.
Results: We generate a dual‑guide CRISPR/Cas9 Library and analyse 472 pre
dicted synthetic lethal pairs in 27 cancer cell Lines from melanoma, pancreatic 
and lung cancer Lineages. We report a robust collection of 117 genetic interactions 
within and across cancer types and explore their candidacy as therapeutic targets. 
We show that SLC25A28 is an attractive target since its synthetic lethal paralog 
partner SLC25A37 is homozygously deleted pan‑cancer. We generate knockout mice 
for Slc25a28 revealing that, except for cataracts in some mice, these animals are normal; 
suggesting inhibition of SLC25A28 is unlikely to be associated with profound toxicity.
Conclusions: We provide and validate an extensive collection of synthetic lethal inter
actions across cancer types.
Keywords: CRISPR, Synthetic lethality, Epistasis, High‑throughput screening
Background
Synthetic lethality (SL) is the concept whereby a cell can survive the loss or muta
tion of two genes individually, but concurrent loss of both genes results in cell death 
or a significant loss of cell fitness [1]. In principle, SL interactions can be exploited 
therapeutically, since somatic alterations that drive cancer development or that are a 
consequence of the genomic instability that drives tumorigenesis, may create vulner
abilities via the inactivation of a single member of a SL gene pair. In this way tumour 
cells can be selectively targeted and under optimal conditions the effect of therapy 
© The Author(s) 2025. Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits 
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third 
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the mate
rial. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// 
creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 2 of 26
on normal tissues minimised. The success of synthetic lethality as an approach in the 
clinic is best exemplified by use of PARP inhibitors in the treatment of cancers with 
deficiency in homologous recombination repair related genes, such as BRCA1/2 and 
RAD51C [2, 3]. Of note, next-generation PARP inhibitors [4] selectively target PARP1, 
while having minimal effect on PARP2, avoiding the haematopoietic toxicity asso
ciated with PARP2 inhibition while also illustrating that it is possible to selectively 
inhibit targets, such as single paralogs, even when they have high sequence similarity 
and related functions.
Large-scale CRISPR-Cas9 screens such as DepMap [5, 6] have identified many 
essential genes required for the survival of cancer cell lines across diverse lineages. 
Importantly, although well over a thousand cell lines have been screened with single 
gRNA (guide RNA) CRISPR libraries, these experiments are under-powered to sys
tematically define all interacting gene pairs. What complicates this analysis further is 
the complex architecture of the cancer genome and tumour heterogeneity, the limited 
genetic events captured in available cancer cell lines, the enormous combinatorial 
space of possible interacting gene pairs, and gene redundancy. Of note, those genes 
in the genome for which a paralogous gene has been described have been reported to 
be significantly less likely to be essential, and it is believed that this is due to the phe
nomenon of “paralog buffering” [7–9].
Several studies have sought to identify novel synthetic lethal gene pairs using dual
guide, also known as combinatorial, CRISPR screening [9–14]. Due to current practi
cal screening limitations, it is not possible to screen all pairs of protein coding genes 
in parallel, so all such screens have focused on relatively small subsets of protein-cod
ing gene pairs. Paralog pairs have been explored in a number of these studies, lead
ing to the identification of several paralog synthetic lethal interactions, yet despite 
some overlap between screens most paralog pairs reported as synthetic lethal in these 
publications appear cell line specific [15–17]. It is important to note, however, that 
most screens have analysed just two to four cell lines from a diverse range of cancer 
types/cell lineages, meaning that we lack a comprehensive picture of the pan-cancer 
synthetic lethal landscape. The aim of our study was to further build upon previous 
analyses and perform dual-guide CRISPR screens across a large panel of models from 
different cancer types to identify robust and reproducible SL genetic interactions. 
Our focus was non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), pancreatic cancer, and mela
noma; selected as cancers of unmet clinical need (lung and pancreas) and a cancer 
type that can rapidly progress and for which few effective therapies exist for patients 
who are unresponsive to or who relapse following immunotherapy (melanoma) [18, 
19]. To optimise the relevance of the gene pairs we analysed, we selected candidate 
synthetic lethal interactions from paralogous gene pairs and gene pairs predict to 
interact based on integrated analyses of tumours and cell Lines, aiming to enrich for 
interactions that could be positioned in the clinic. In this endeavour, which is one 
of the largest of its kind to date, we present data from 472 gene pairs across 27 cell 
lines and identify a robust set of SL gene interactions, as well as several novel context
dependent hits. We further examine the hits from the screen using multi-parameter 
imaging and knockout mouse studies.
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 3 of 26
Results
Identification of potential synthetic lethal gene pairs for dual‑guide CRISPR screening
We selected gene pairs for screening from three different sources. Our first selection 
criteria focused on identifying paralog pair families with two members that had a 
percentage amino acid sequence identity greater than or equal to 45%. We required 
these genes to have an ortholog in Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis 
elegans with a lethal phenotype when disrupted in these organisms. We selected 
genes in this way reasoning that their evolutionary conserved essential function 
would likely translate into cellular lethality when their orthologs, found as paralogs 
in human cells, were co-disrupted. We identified these genes and their associated 
phenotyping data using Flymine [FB2015_15] [20] and Wormbase [WS251] [21, 22] 
and by using the Ensembl Compara platform [22]. From this analysis we included 
262 gene pairs in our library. The second group of gene pairs were identified using 
a linear regression model between gene-expression and CRISPR-Cas9 essential
ity to identify gene pairs that were more likely to be classified as essential in sin
gle guide CRISPR screens when a second gene had low/no expression. This analysis 
involved the use of data from Project Score [23] and was performed across 274 cell 
lines of diverse origin [11]. Analysis in this way defined 95 candidate gene pairs that 
were included in the library. Additional paralogous/non-paralogous putative syn
thetic lethal gene pairs were identified by linear modelling and data integration with 
MASH-up [24] using pan-cancer TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) [25], expres
sion and copy number data together with data from loss-of-function RNAi-based 
screens (The Achilles Project) [26], and copy number profiles from the Cancer Cell 
Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) cancer cell line dataset [27], nominating a further 115 
gene pairs. A schematic of the library design is shown in Fig. 1, and the gene pairs are 
in Additional File 1: Table S1. Further details on the selection of gene pairs are pro
vided in the Methods. To be included in the Library, each of the genes in each gene 
pair was required to have between 6 and 8 guides, selected to have low off-target 
scores, a metric of particular importance when targeting closely related sequences 
such as paralogs [28] (Additional File 1: Table S1). We opted to use a lentiviral dual 
promoter system consisting of hU6 and mU6 promoters (Fig. 1) engineering this 
vector to contain two different tracr sequences to reduce the risk of viral recombina
tion. We first tested the positional/promoter effect of the vector by cloning guides 
(gRNAs) against the cell surface proteins CD15 and CD33 into vectors behind each 
of the promoters, analysing the results by flow cytometry. We also tested several 
tracr sequences (Additional file 2: Fig S1) [10, 29]. Although no obvious positional 
bias was seen at a single guide pair level, to mitigate for this possibility at library 
scale we placed half of the gRNAs for each gene behind each promoter. In the final 
vector we also modified the spacer region and tracr sequence to facilitate down
stream sequencing and to reduce possible plasmid recombination. The final vector 
sequence is provided in Additional file 3. In the Library, guides were configured to 
produce between 18 to 32 guide combinations targeting each gene pair (Additional 
file 2: Fig S2). In addition to these paired gene/gRNA vectors, each gRNA was paired 
with a “safe targeting” control selected from Morgens et al., [30]. These gRNAs 
target regions outside genes that lack any known biological function. Of note, like 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 4 of 26
Fig. 1 Design and implementation of a dual guide CRISPR library to detect synthetic lethal gene pairs. 
A Schematic of the dual‑guide vector used for library construction containing a human U6 (hU6) and a 
mouse U6 (mU6), two gRNAs and two tracrRNA sequences in a lentiviral backbone (see Methods). B The 
Library contained a total of 22,823 unique gRNAs, targeting 472 gene pairs selected from paralogous genes, 
MASH‑up analysis of Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)/Achilles data, and gene pairs derived from an analysis to 
associate gene expression and CRISPR essentiality (see Methods). Controls included essential/non‑essential 
genes and safe‑targeting controls. Each of the abovementioned gRNAs targeting gene pairs were paired 
with one of the safe‑targeting control sequences in the library allowing us to compute the cell fitness effect 
of single gene disruption. C Outlines the methodology used to select the gene pairs analysed in this study. 
Linear regression associations between CRISPR‑Cas9 and RNA‑Seq datasets were statistically assessed using 
log‑ratio tests, and multiple hypothesis testing correction was applied using the Benjamini–Hochberg False 
Discovery Rate (FDR) method
all guides, these gRNAs generate a double stand break in the genome, but they do 
not disrupt the function of a gene. This allows us to accurately compute the single 
gene vs double gene knockout effects and thus to observe interactions between gene 
pairs. Finally, to calibrate our analysis for defining synthetic lethal relationships, we 
included guides targeting known essential and non-essential genes [23] within our 
Library. In total this resulted in an overall Library size of 22,823 unique guide pairs 
targeting 472 gene pairs, controls and safe-targeting regions (Fig. 1, Additional File 
1: Table S1).
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 5 of 26
Screening of melanoma, lung and pancreas cell lines
Our Library was used to successfully screen a panel of 27 highly characterised, 
sequenced and transcriptome profiled, Cas9-positive cell Lines from three cancer 
backgrounds: 8 melanoma, 10 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and 9 pancreatic 
cancer cell lines. Captured within these models were the common driver mutations 
cognate to these malignancies [5]. All screens were performed in technical tripli
cate at 1000 × library representation over a 28-day time course and at a multiplic
ity of infection of 0.3. In addition, we screened three Cas9 wildtype lines (Capan1, 
A-549 and MeWo), one from each cell Lineage for 7 days to access guide abundance 
within the library for use as a normalisation control. The growth conditions for each 
line are provided in Additional File 1: Table S2. After 28 days, cells were pelleted for 
DNA extraction, and sequencing generated an average of 38 million read pairs per 
replicate (see Methods). We also assessed Library coverage, which was greater than 
300× for most replicates. We next calculated the Gini Index, revealing that most 
replicates had a Gini score < 0.5 (Additional file 2: Fig S3). The counts matrix is pro
vided in Additional File 1: Table S3.
Assessing screen performance and identifying synthetic lethal gene pairs
Prior to analysis of our dual guide data, we undertook a series of quality control steps 
initially assessing the correlation between screens. Samples were excluded if they had 
a null-normalized mean difference (NNMD) greater than −2. Of note, we had initially 
screened 29 cell lines, but QC analysis led to the exclusion of two melanoma lines 
(COLO-792 & WM3702) and four screen replicates, leaving us with 27 lines. Correlation 
of the control replicates is shown in Additional file 2: Fig S4 and all other QC metrics 
are shown in Additional file 2: Fig S3. All remaining replicates had BAGEL2 AUC (area 
under the receiver operating characteristics curve) > 0.88 [31].
We next examined the distribution of our essential and non-essential gene controls 
scaling normalised  log2-fold changes (LFC) for each cell line by setting the median 
of the dual safes (control vectors where a safe-targeting control was paired with a 
gRNA targeting a non-essential gene) to 0 and the median of the single essentials 
(gRNA targeting a known essential gene paired with a safe-targeting control) to −1. 
To identify SL gene pairs, we followed a similar analysis method to that employed 
by Thompson et al. [11] based on the Bliss model [32]. Briefly, we compared the 
additive effect of each single gene knockout (predicted) to that observed when 
both genes were targeted simultaneously (observed). The difference between these 
metrics was determined from Loess regression analysis and termed the residual or 
genetic interaction (GI) score. A gene pair was considered a SL hit if it had a mean 
normalised residual (GI) < −0.5 and FDR < 0.01. To remove genes that had a sig
nificant effect on growth by themselves, we computed gene essentialities with both 
MAGeCK [33] and BAGEL2 [31] using the constructs where guides were paired 
with safe-targeting controls. The number of gene pairs classified as a "hit" per cell 
line, where the pair is found in three or more lines, is shown in Fig. 2. This analysis 
shows that there was some variation in the yield of interactions between Lines with 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 6 of 26
Fig. 2 Identification of synthetic lethal gene pairs across 27 cancer cell lines. Heatmap depicting all 
gene pairs that were classed as synthetic lethal (SL) in 3 or more cell lines. Box colour indicates the mean 
normalized GI score with pairs considered a hit if the mean normalised GI score was < −0.5 and the 
Benjamini–Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.01 (normalised GI scores mean comparison using T‑test). 
Blanks indicate where a gene pair was not a hit in that cell line. Black vertical lines are used to separate cell 
lines from lung, melanoma, and pancreas. The cell line names are shown on the X‑axis. Right: Bar plot shows 
the frequency that the indicated pairs were a hit with the bar coloured by the cancer type
the number of hits identified ranging from between 15 (MeWo) to 44 (AsPC-1/SK
MEL-2) (Fig. 2). Additional File 1: Table S4-5.
Combinatorial screening reveals pan‑cancer synthetic lethal gene pairs
Analysis of our screen data as described above identified a robust set of SL gene pairs, 
with 17 pairs called a ‘hit’ in more than two thirds of tested lines (Fig. 2). Although 
no gene pair was ubiquitously SL, four pairs were classified as a hit in 25 out of the 
27 lines: CNOT7|CNOT8, SAR1A|SAR1B, GDI1|GDI2 and SEC23A|SEC23B. Notably, 
although CNOT7|CNOT8 were not called as a hit in two lines, in both instances this 
was because they did not pass our stringent hit thresholds for either GI or FDR. In 
one line the GI was −0.455 (threshold, −0.5) and for the other Line the FDR was 
0.066 (threshold < 0.01). Similarly, in two cell lines SAR1A|SAR1B and GDI1|GDI2 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 7 of 26
were not called a hit because in both cases one of the genes caused single gene lethal
ity, suggesting these genes retain important biological functions not buffered by 
their paralog partner in these lines (Fig. 2; Additional File 1: Table S4 & S5). Inter
estingly, few gene pairs were specific to cell lineage, with the notable exception of 
GIT1|GIT2 which was a hit in 12 cell lines, but never in a melanoma line. Similarly, 
NAA10|NAA11 was only a hit in melanoma lines and never in lung or pancreas can
cer models (Fig. 2). This lack of tumour-type specificity is perhaps unsurprising given 
the selection of gene pairs for inclusion in our library; however, taken together these 
observations imply that the genes that are a hit in multiple lines have well conserved 
and critical biological functions regardless of cell background or the driver mutations 
found in the models we screened.
Overlap of our data with published combinatorial CRISPR screens
We next chose to look at the overlap between our data and data from other published 
combinatorial screens. To do this we used the Synthetic Lethality Knowledge Base 
(SLKB) [34], which contains data from 22 cell Lines previously screened with combi
natorial CRISPR Libraries, including 3 lines also screened as part of this study (Fig. 3). 
Of the 472 gene pairs we screened, 117 pairs were “hits”, which we defined as synthetic 
lethal in at least one cell line we screened (Additional File 1: Table S6). In total, we found 
882 interactions across the cell Line panel. Of note, 272 of the 472 gene pairs had previ
ously been screened with data deposited in SLKB (we used the author reported data for 
our analysis). Of these 130/272 were scored as negative (“neg”/no SL interaction) in the 
screens reported in this paper, which was in complete concordance with data in SLKB. 
T
his suggests a very low false negative rate in our study for the detection of epistasis/
genetic interactions. Of the 117 hit pairs we identified, 14 were also reported as hits in 
SLKB for the same cell Line. In contrast, 24 pairs were hits in our study but were not 
classified as such in another study using the same Line. Finally, we called 54 pairs as a hit 
pair in a cell Line, and these pairs were also a hit in a screen reported in SLKB, but they 
were not a hit in the cell Line we screened with data for this cell line and gene pair also 
available in SLKB. It is notable that some of the abovementioned 54 pairs came from a 
study previously published by our group [11], with several of these pairs being orthogo
nally validated by us and in other studies [35]. This discordance likely reflects differences 
in screen timepoints, analysis methods and hit calling stringency, with other factors 
such as different culture conditions, gRNA designs, sequencing depth and sequencing/
library coverage also likely to be contributing factors. Together with the low pan-screen 
false negative rate our analysis suggests that our screens have high sensitivity to detect 
SL interactions across the dataset, but moderate specificity to detect an interaction in 
a specific cell line. It is notable that a previous comparison of combinatorial screening 
analysis methods [34] suggested that they exhibit low overlap, and uniformly ascertained 
datasets such as ours will help to develop better analysis approaches.
Context dependent SL interactions
To further explore the overlap of hits between cell lines within our analysis, we plot
ted the GI score of every hit for every gene pair by tumour type (Fig. 4). Intriguingly, 
as noted above, despite having data from 472 gene pairs, only 117 were ever a hit. 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 8 of 26
Fig. 3 Overlap of our hits and those identified by other published dual guide CRISPR screens. A We 
compared the data from the screens in this paper to those from the Synthetic Lethality Knowledge Database 
(SLKB) [34]. The screens performed in this study are shown on the right of the body, with those in SLKB 
shown on the left. Commonly screened cell lines are highlighted in red. The number in brackets next to the 
cell line name refers to the number of independent screens performed in that line. The anatomical locations 
are approximate and for reproductive system cancers the sex of the cell lines is shown (M; male. F; female). 
B Shown are diagrams reflecting the overlap of data from the 472 gene pairs screened in this study. We 
identified 117 screen “hits” across all 27 cell Lines screened. Of these 472 pairs, 272 were found in SLKB and 
130 of these pairs were not called as synthetic lethal in our screens or in any SLKB screen (neg pairs). Shown 
below (box diagram) is a breakdown of the 117 screen hits in comparison SLKB data. The full dataset is 
available in Additional File 1: Table S6
Moreover, only around 5% of our Library was a hit in more than 50% of the cell lines 
tested (Fig. 2 & 3). Of note, of the 472 gene pairs, at least one gene in 95 pairs was found 
to be individually essential, and thus the actual search space for genetic interactions was 
377 pairs. To further delineate the number of context-dependent gene pairs, we sepa
rated the data into groups depending on how often every gene pair was a hit. From this 
we determined that more than half of our hits occurred in only 1 to 5 cell lines (Fig. 4). 
Figure 4 shows that this overlap is not determined by cancer cell type. Of note, another 
factor potentially influencing the results from CRISPR screens is copy number. Cur
rently, there are no well-established methods to correct for this in dual-guide/combina
torial CRISPR screens, so we assessed the possible impact of the copy number landscape 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 9 of 26
Fig. 4 Hits are context specific and not generally associated with cancer type. A The mean normalised GI 
score for each cell line in which the gene pair was classified as a hit is shown. Pairs were considered a hit if 
the mean normalised GI score was < −0.5 and the Benjamini–Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.01 
(normalised GI scores mean comparison using T‑test). Score for each cell line is coloured by cancer type. B Pie 
chart indicating the breakdown of the 472 pairs into never a hit (not a hit in any line), context dependent hit 
(hit in less than 50% of our cell lines), or strong hit (hit in more than 50% of our cell lines). C Pie chart showing 
the number of lines in which each gene pair was classed as SL (excluding those gene pairs that were not a hit 
in any line). D Overlap of hits by cell line cancer type. This Figure depicts gene pairs that were a hit in one or 
more cell line
on our screen hits, to determine if this could be a variable influencing screen output. 
In this way we plotted the copy number of our genes, where data was available, reveal
ing variability in ploidy as expected from a panel of cancer cell lines, with the distribu
tion centring around two. This result is comparable to the results of a similar analysis 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 10 of 26
described by Parrish et al., [12]. More specifically, despite a few genes such as MYC being 
heavily amplified (Additional file 2: Fig S5), we note no obvious skew in our results based 
on copy number, suggesting this is unlikely to be a major contributor to the heterogene
ity in SL phenotypes and the GI scores we compute from the analysis of our screens.
The GI score is an indicator of context independence
Although we established that most hits from our screen are likely context-dependent, 
the data in Fig. 4 suggests an association whereby the most common hits have the lowest 
GI scores. Indeed, every gene pair that had a GI score of < −1.5 in any cell Line was a hit 
in at least 2 additional cell lines. We hypothesised that the most common SL hits would 
also be the strongest, and therefore GI scores could be used to predict the likelihood of 
a gene pair being pan-SL. To test this hypothesis, we plotted the median GI score of the 
hits for each gene pair against the number of cell lines in which the gene pair was a hit 
(Fig. 5). The Pearson’s correlation coefficient for the median normalised GI versus hit 
frequency was −0.557987 (P < 0.0001), implying a statistically significant negative cor
relation. We next plotted the distribution of the GI scores of hits by cell line, revealing 
a dramatic difference between lines with the lowest GI score varying between around 
−1 and −3 (Fig. 5). This variance between cell lines could explain the low correlation 
between GI score and hit frequency.
To minimise the impact of cell Line screening efficiency skewing our identification 
of the strongest hits, we ranked the GI of each gene pair within a cell Line. Taking the 
gene pairs that we had previously designated as strong hits as they occurred in over 50% 
of our lines, we next plotted the ranking of each hit (Fig. 5C). This showed a substan
tial overlap in the top ranked SL gene pairs, with ASF1A|ASF1B ranked number 1 in 13 
lines, and INST6|INTS6L the top ranking hit in 8 cell lines. Most top ranked hits were 
common across multiple lines. This analysis also highlighted a few interesting context 
dependent SL gene pairs such as NXT1/NXT2, recently described as a synthetic lethal 
interaction in paediatric cancer models [36].
We noted that much of the variation in genetic interactions across cell lines appeared 
quantitative rather than qualitative – i.e. rather than a genetic interaction simply being 
present or absent in specific cell lines, there was variation in the effect size of the genetic 
interaction across cell lines. To dissect potential causes of this variation, we treated the 
genetic interaction score as a quantitative trait, similar to how single gene effects have 
been treated in previous analyses [23].
We tested two possible explanations for variance in genetic interaction score – 
variation across cancer type (melanoma vs pancreatic vs lung) and variation in the 
expression of individual genes in each gene pair being targeted. We focussed our 
analysis on 117 gene pairs that were identified as synthetic lethal in at least 1 cell 
line. Using a linear modelling approach (see Methods), we found that ~ 20% of these 
pairs (23 out of 117 at an FDR of 10%; Additional File 1: Table S7) demonstrated 
variation across cancer types. For example, the paralog pair CLASP1/CLASP2 dis
played a much stronger genetic interaction effect in lung and pancreatic models 
than in melanoma models (P = 0.0001, FDR: 0.011; Fig. 5D). Conversely, the pair 
NAA10/NAA11 displayed a much stronger genetic interaction effect in melanoma 
models than in lung or pancreatic models (P = 0.0025, FDR: 0.042; Fig. 5D). To 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 11 of 26
Fig. 5 Using GI score and gene pair rankings to define the strongest context independent SL gene pairs. A 
Median GI score per gene pair in which the pair was classed as a hit, plotted against the number of cell lines 
the gene pair was a hit. Line shows the linear regression analysis with the Pearson’s r correlation coefficient 
and p‑value computed to be −0.557987 and p‑value = 6.326e‑11, respectively. B Range of mean normalised 
GI scores for hits per cell line. C Per cell line each hit was ranked by GI score (lowest GI score for each Line 
ranked as 1). Graph shows the ranking of each hit per line for the gene pairs classed as strong hits (i.e. a hit 
in more than 50% of screened lines). D The effect of cell lineage on synthetic lethality/GI score. P values are 
derived from a Type II ANOVA analysis with Benjamini–Hochberg correction. E–F Expression impacts the 
penetrance of genetic interactions. LFC represents the effect if single gene and double gene disruption. 
Scaled mRNA levels are shown. GI refers to the GI score
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 12 of 26
assess the impact of the expression of individual paralogs on the genetic interac
tion effect we assessed the correlation between the GI score and the mRNA abun
dance of each gene in the pair. We found that, at an FDR of 10%, variation in the GI 
score of 7 gene pairs could be associated with variation in the mRNA abundance of 
at least one gene in the pair. For instance, the genetic interaction between MAT1A/
MAT2A was only evident in cell lines where MAT1A was expressed at higher levels 
(Pearsons = −0.6657, P = 0.045; Additional File 1: Table S7). In cell lines with no, or 
extremely low, expression of MAT1A, then MAT2A was individually essential, and 
no genetic interaction was observed (Fig. 5E).
We note that cancer type specific effects and variation in gene expression are not 
mutually exclusive explanations for variation in genetic interaction effects – some gene 
pairs are likely synthetic lethal in specific cancer types due to cancer-type specific vari
ation in the expression of members of the gene pair. For instance, NAA11 displays low 
expression in pancreatic and lung cell lines and, likely as a result, its paralog NAA10 
appears to be individually essential in these models. In contrast, in melanoma models 
NAA11 is highly expressed and NAA10 is not individually essential, but in these models 
the combined disruption of NAA10/NAA11 causes a significant growth defect (Fig. 5F).
Previous work has established that there can be significant variation in the synthetic 
lethality of paralogs across cancer cell lines [11, 15, 16]. Our results here suggest that 
variation in mRNA expression of the paralogs themselves is one contributing factor.
Phenotypic validation of pan‑cancer synthetic lethal gene pairs
To further explore the gene pairs we identified, we took our top gene pairs, those that 
were a hit in 23 or more cells lines, and performed phenotypic analysis on cells in which 
we had supressed their expression using siRNA. More specifically, our aim was to deter
mine the phenotypic effects of these pairs and determine if they reduced cell growth 
and/or increased cell death using orthogonal techniques and to explore the underlying 
biology/mechanisms of synthetic lethality. To achieve this, we knocked down the gene 
pairs using siRNAs in A549 cells, selecting this model because of its ease of imaging 
and because the interactions to be tested were found in this line by CRISPR screening 
(Fig. 6A). Analysis was performed 72 h after siRNA transfection where cells were stained 
with markers of proliferation (EdU) and apoptosis (Annexin V), as well as markers of 
cell morphology (Hoechst, F-actin and α-tubulin) with cells imaged using the Operetta 
system. Analysis was performed using a machine learning algorithm implemented to 
categorize cells as proliferative, non-proliferative or apoptotic, or as having other pheno
types. Of note, our approach aimed to capture the acute effects of gene silencing, where 
scorable, but since the original CRISPR screens were performed over several weeks, late 
effects beyond the 72 h timepoint will not be visible. Importantly, during pilot experi
ments we observed several conditions that led to the appearance of atypically “large 
cells”, so we added this as an additional classification category to our screen analysis. In 
Fig. 6B we show the average percentage of cells per siRNA treatment that were classified 
into each of the abovementioned categories. These data are displayed as percentages and 
show cellular phenotypes including decreased proliferation and increased numbers of 
enlarged cells for several gene pairs including CNOT7/CNOT8, ASF1A/ASF1B (Fig. 6C
E). Of note, several significant gene pairs from the CRISPR screens had no obvious effect 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 13 of 26
Fig. 6 Phenotypic validation of strongest hits by siRNA knockdown and subsequent cell imaging. A GI scores 
in the A549 cell line for the pairs analyses by imaging. B Percentage of cells defined as apoptotic, enlarged, 
non‑proliferative and proliferative. C Fold change in apoptotic, enlarged, non‑proliferative and proliferative 
for genes and gene pairs analysed in this experiment. The data represent the median of four independent 
experiments with the lines and bars the IQRs. D Representative pictures of cellular phenotypes observed 
following gene co‑disruption. Colours are as follows: DNA (blue), tubulin/spindles (green), Annexin V/
apoptosis (red)
on cell growth or other phenotypes. This Likely reflects the proximal timepoint of analy
sis at 72 h after siRNA transfection, with the cell fitness phenotypes we observed in our 
CRISPR screens occurring after 28 days in culture. This observation may explain why 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 14 of 26
previous attempts to identify synthetic lethal interactions using siRNA/shRNAs have 
been problematic and lower return when compared to CRISPR-based approaches [37].
Positioning of SL gene pairs
While the primary goal of our study was to identify epistatic synthetic lethal interac
tions at scale, translation of these results such that candidates may be targeted thera
peutically is of great interest. To advance this we used pan-cancer genomic data derived 
from 30 studies to explore the landscape of gene disruption by copy number alteration, 
and the expression of gene pair candidates using data from both GTEx [38], represent
ing normal tissues, and the Tumor Genome Atlas (TCGA) [25]. As shown in Fig. 7, for 
several genes, most notably CNOT7, GDI1 and SLC25A37, there are a subset of tumours 
that showed homozygous deletion and thus inhibition/suppression of CNOT8, GDI2 or 
SLC25A28, respectively, would be predicted to provoke cellular lethality/reduced cancer 
cell fitness. Similarly, cases with homozygous deletion of one member of a SL gene pair 
were found for the other candidate pairs, albeit at a lower frequency. Since our screen
ing efforts had focused on tumour cell lines, we were mindful that one factor that might 
preclude the candidacy of a SL interaction for therapeutic development is whether loss/
silencing of the target is observed in normal cells/tissues. Although some genes such 
as PDS5B were expressed at low levels across normal tissues, ASF1B was the only gene 
whose expression was convincingly absent. This included brain, liver and pancreas with 
this expression profile suggesting that ASF1A inhibitors should be developed with cau
tion. Extending this analysis further we identified 62 gene pairs for which we observed 
ubiquitous expression in normal tissues, loss of expression of one member of the pair 
in tumours, where the pair was also found to be a screen hit (Fig. 7). Further triaging 
of these candidates may reveal paradigms for further drug development. Given our 
abovementioned desire to minimise the risk that therapeutic candidates were toxic to 
normal cells we next asked if any of these 62 genes had been disrupted as part of the 
Sanger Mouse Genetics Project, where null alleles in mice had been extensively pheno
typed for > 200 traits [39]. In this way we found knockouts for several genes including 
Slc25a28 and Cnot7. Knockouts of further genes were extensively phenotyped across 
the International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium [40] (Additional File 1: Table S8). 
We were drawn to focus on a knockout of Slc25a28, noting that this mutant line had 
been scored as having cataracts in some mice, but no other phenotypic traits (Additional 
f
ile 2: Fig S6). In keeping with this, SLC25A28 has a pLI (predicted probability of loss-of
function) score of 0.85 in Gnomad [41] suggesting moderate tolerance of transcript/gene 
loss; essential genes have a pLI of ~ 1. Finally, we next aimed to determine which of the 
pairs we screened had compounds already designed against them, including those used 
in clinical trials, or if they potentially represent tractable targets for therapy. To do this 
we used the COSMIC actionability classifications [42] and the Pharos target designa
tions for each gene/target. Pharos classifications [43] include four ranks Tclin, Tchem, 
Tbio and Tdark. These ranks denote targets that are clinically established targets, those 
that have chemical modulators available that have already been developed, proteins 
with well-established biological roles but no known chemical modulators or approved 
drugs, or understudied or unknown targets, respectively (Additional File 1: Table S9). 
For some of the pairs in our library chemical compounds have already been developed. 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 15 of 26
Fig. 7 Positioning of synthetic lethal interactions via comparison to human cancer and normal tissue 
datasets. A Analysis of pan‑cancer copy number profiles for selected synthetic lethal gene pairs with the data 
expressed as a percentage frequency for each TCGA cancer type. The data was downloaded from the Xena 
Browser [45] and has been described previously [46]. Dark blue denotes homozygous loss of each gene by 
cancer type. B Expression of synthetic lethal genes across cancer types. Shown are the transcripts per million 
values. C Expression of synthetic lethal genes across normal tissues. Shown are the transcripts per million 
values. The data was downloaded from GTEx [38]. D We identified 62 gene pairs for which we observed 
ubiquitous expression in normal tissues, loss of expression of one member of the pair in tumours (left), where 
the pair was also found to be a screen hit. Expression was defined as > 1 TPM
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 16 of 26
For SLC25A28 specifically, no compounds have been synthesized yet, but SLC25A28 has 
been reported to be in the mitochondrial inner membrane where other agents have been 
developed [44].
Discussion
PARP inhibitors are a well-tolerated and effective anti-cancer therapy that rely on 
defects in genes controlling homologous recombination to create a cellular vulner
ability. In recent times, clinical trial data has suggested these agents could be used 
for prophylaxis in germline carriers of pathogenic BRCA1/2 alleles [47]. The develop
ment of additional synthetic lethal strategies for cancer management is therefore of 
great interest.
In this paper, we describe one of the largest combinatorial CRISPR studies per
formed to date, defining 117 synthetic lethal gene pairs which we further position by 
comparison to human cancer genome datasets; by functional experiments in vitro, 
and by exploring the phenotypes of knockout mice. There are several notable aspects 
of our study. Firstly, using the strategy of selecting gene pairs described here we 
observed that few of the hits were unique to any one cell lineage/tumour type. Since 
each of the tumour types we screened have a different cell of origin, different driver 
mutations and genomic structures, it seems likely that in most cases interactions are 
not readily predictable from the genome sequence or tumour type alone, at least for 
the candidate SL pairs we screened. This is in keeping with analyses of DepMap where 
a limit number of vulnerabilities of large biological effect have been conclusively asso
ciated with tumour type or genomic features, the exception being the interaction 
between mismatch repair deficiency and WRN [48], and the targeting of tumour type 
or lineage-specific oncogenes. This is at least in part an issue of power, where not all 
cancer-associated genomic features are captured in available cell line models, but it 
also reflects the complexity of defining these interactions. The gene pairs we exam
ined here were ascertained from multiple analyses yet paralog pairs gave the highest 
yield of SL interaction, as we have described previously [11]. Reassuringly, as part of 
this study we identified several gene pairs such as SLC25A37/SLC25A28 and CNOT7/
CNOT8 that represent attractive targets for further drug development, with Slc25a28 
knockout mice being viable and fertile with no overt phenotypes, other than cataracts 
in some mice.
Conclusions
Our dataset will facilitate benchmarking activities which will be important for the 
development of better screen analysis algorithms and alongside the large collection of 
synthetic lethal pairs, will provide new interactions with which to explore the biology 
of epistasis.
Methods
All code and notebooks used in this study are available in Github [67] and Zenodo 
[49]. All code is covered by an MIT license.
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 17 of 26
Public data retrieval
For 503 cancer cell lines included in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopaedia, we down
loaded publicly available shRNA screening-based gene essentiality data (represented 
as DEMETER-based Z-scores: ExpandedGeneZSolsCleaned.csv) from the Project 
Achilles Data Portal (http:// porta ls. broad insti tute. org/ achil les/, v2.20.2) [50]. For 
these same cell lines, we also downloaded publicly available SNP array-based gene
level copy number profiles (CCLE_copynumber_byGene_2013-12–03.txt) from the 
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia Data Portal (now accessible as CCLE legacy data 
at https:// data. broad insti tute. org/ ccle_ legacy_ data/ dna_ copy_ number/) [27]. Gene
specific vectors that integrate the human STRING network (v9.1) using the Mashup 
algorithm were obtained from the supplementary data of the original publication 
(string_human_mashup_vectors_d800_V1.txt) [24]. Additionally, SNP array-based 
copy number profiles (computed using the GISTIC algorithm [51]) and RNA-seq 
based gene expression data for 7,537 patients/tumours from The Cancer Genome 
Atlas (TCGA; see Additional File 1: Table S10 for patient IDs) were accessed through 
the Broad Firehose Analysis Pipeline in March 2018. Further datasets are described in 
each of the methods sections below.
Identification of synthetic lethal gene pairs
Predicted SL gene pairs were identified from three sources (Fig. 1). Firstly, to identify 
potential SL gene paralogs 19,781 protein coding genes from Ensembl v92 were scanned 
for paralogs with > = 45 percent reciprocal sequence identity. Flymine [52] and Worm
Base [21] were used to identify corresponding orthologs with a lethal phenotype upon 
deletion/depletion in Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans (annotated 
Paralog). Secondly, we used a multi-step statistical approach to predict SL genes by: 1). 
For every gene, we identified the top 50 functionally most similar genes, by calculating 
gene–gene Pearson correlations among Mashup-based gene-specific vectors represent
ing an integration of the human STRING networks [24]. As shown previously [24] this 
strategy identifies gene pairs with highly similar biological functions (including but not 
limited to paralogs), which are strongly enriched for genetic interactions. 2). For the 
resulting potentially interacting gene pairs, we next employed ordinary least squares 
regression (using the Python package Statsmodels (https:// www. stats models. org), on 
the Achilles dataset [26] of 503 cancer cell lines. This was to assess if copy number loss 
(defined as a copy number score < −0.3, GISTIC’s default noise threshold for deletions) 
of one gene in a pair correlates with increased essentiality (indicated by a lower DEM
ETER-based Z-score) of the partner gene, while adjusting for the tissue of origin. Gene 
pairs located on the same chromosome were excluded because they share similar copy 
number dynamics, which could falsely suggest significant interactions due to increased 
sensitivity to shRNA knockdown when the gene is (heterozygously) deleted. From this 
analysis, we identified 357 significant gene pairs (Benjamini–Hochberg FDR < 0.1). 3). 
Finally, for these 357 pairs, we used ordinary least squares regression to investigate, in 
a pan-cancer context using data from 7,537 patients/tumours in TCGA, if the deletion 
of one gene (again defined as a GISTIC copy number score < −0.3) was associated with a 
significant upregulation of RNA expression of the partner gene. This analysis yielded 125 
significant (Benjamini–Hochberg FDR < 0.1) computationally derived putative synthetic 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 18 of 26
lethal gene pairs (115 were included in the library). Thirdly, a linear regression model 
was used to identify associations between corrected LFCs from CRISPR/Cas9 single 
knockout screen data and RNA expression data. Cell line growth rate and cancer types 
were included as covariates. A log-ratio test with a null hypothesis model was used to 
determine statistically significant associations and the strongest of these taken forward 
and included in the library. For controls, we included guides targeting established non
essential and essential genes [23], as well as several safe targeting guides [30].
gRNA selection and library design
We selected 8 guides per gene; 4 from the Brunello library [53] and 4 from the Toronto 
library [54]. When 4 guides from these sources were unavailable a guide was selected 
from the Lander-Sabatini library [55] or designed in house using the Broad GPP server 
(https:// porta ls. broad insti tute. org/ gpp/ public/). Where a minimum of six guides were 
not available, the gene was excluded from the library. Additional File 1: Table S1 contains 
on-target/off-target scores for all gRNAs, these calculations are detailed below. A variant 
of this library has been published previously [56].
Library cloning
Library cloning was undertaken following the general protocol of Vidigal and Ventura 
[57] with some modifications to the vector to replace the second sgRNA scaffold and 
modify the region between the first scaffold and second promoter to prevent spurious 
primer binding. Oligo sequences were ordered from TWIST Bioscience with the fol
lowing sequence and designed to modify the second scaffold to a sequence taken from 
Shen et al., [10]. We resuspended the synthesised TWIST oligo pool to a concentration 
of 0.01 ng/µl and amplified it using Q5 High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix (NEB, #M0492). 
24 × 50 µl PCR reactions were performed with conditions as follows: initial denaturation 
of 98 °C for 30 s, 17 cycles of 98 °C for 10 s, 68 °C for 35 s and 72 °C for 30 s and a final 
72 °C extension for 10 min. The resulting products were purified using a PCR Cleanup 
Kit (Monarch T1030S).
We obtained a modified pDonor_mU6 vector from GeneArt and digested it with BbsI 
(NEB R3539S). Linearised vector was excised from an agarose gel, purified using a DNA 
gel extraction kit (Monarch T1020S) and the oligo library cloned using NEBuilder® HiFi 
DNA Assembly Master Mix (NEB E2621S). The Gibson product was then digested using 
BbsI and gel purified. It is important to note that because this Ligation and Linerisation 
strategy results in complementary stick ends, it is possible for guides to form concatem
ers prior to BbsI digest. As most guide pairs in our library are unique, BbsI cleavage will 
result in guide swapping and a subsequently high guide mismatch rate. We were aware 
of this problem from previous libraries and thus we increased our screen representation 
to 1000× to compensate for the reads that are discarded due to mismatching.
T
he lenti-guide-puro backbone plasmid (Addgene #52,963) was digested using BsmBI 
(NEB R0580S), dephosphorylated using Antarctic Phosphatase (NEB M0289S) and the 
linerised vector was excised from a gel. The cloned oligo fragments now containing two 
guides separated by the first guide scaffold and mU6 promoter were cloned into the lin
erised lenti-guide-puro vector using the quick ligation kit (NEB M2200). The Library was 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 19 of 26
purified and electroporated into NEB 10-beta electrocompetent E.Coli (NEB C3020); 10 
electroporation reactions were performed each with 25 µl of bacteria and 2.5 µl library. 
Serial dilutions were plated on ampicillin agar plates to assess library representation 
and the remainder of the library expanded in liquid culture containing ampicillin over
night. Bacteria was pelleted and plasmid DNA extracted using the Giga prep kit (Qiagen 
12,991). The sequence of the final vector is provided in Extended Note 1.
Cell culture, lentivirus production and cell screening
All cell lines were obtained from ATCC except for CO92, which was from Dr. Nick Hay
ward (QIMR, Brisbane). All cell lines were STR profiled to confirm authenticity. None 
of the cell lines used have previously been misidentified [58]. Cell Lines were cultured 
in DMEM or RPMI with 10% FBS except for HEK293T, which were cultured in IMDM 
(Additional File 1: Table S2). L-Glut was added as required. All Lines were confirmed to 
be mycoplasma negative and cultured at 37 °C in 5%  CO2. To make lentivirus 1.8 ×  107 
HEK293T cells were transfected with 4 μg pMD2.G (Addgene #12,259), 18.5 μg psPAX2 
(Addgene #12,260) and 7.5 ug/ml transfer vector. Media was Changed within 16 h of 
transfection, virus was filtered with 0.45 μm low protein-binding filters after 30 h, ali
quoted, and stored at −80 °C.
Cell lines were made Cas9 positive by infecting with lentivirus produced with 
pKLV2EF1a-Cas9Bsd-W plasmid (Addgene #68,343) and selected with blasticidin 
(InvivoGen). Cas9 activity was assessed to be over 90% using a BFP/GFP reporter assay 
using pKLV2-U6gRNA5(gGFP)-PGKBFP2AGFP-W (Addgene #67,980) and pKLV2
U6gRNA5(Empty)-PGKBFP2AGFP-W (Addgene #67,979), as described by Tzelepis 
et al., [59].
For screening, the library virus was titrated using puromycin selection and an MTS 
assay (Promega G3580) to assess cell viability. Then, cells were infected in suspension 
using virus at an MOI of 0.3 and Polybrene. Media was Changed the following day and 
puromycin added 24 h later. Infections were conducted at 1000 × representation and 
cells maintained at 3000 × representation for the duration of the screen. Cells contain
ing Cas9 were harvested 28 days post infection, control Cas9 null cells were harvested at 
7 days.
DNA extraction, PCR and sequencing
DNA was extracted from cell pellets using the Gentra Puregene Cell Kit (Qiagen 
158,388). 50 × 50 µl PCR reactions were performed per sample/replicate each contain
ing: 3 ug genomic DNA, 25 µl 2 × KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (Roche KK2602) and 
primers listed in Additional File 1: Table S11. Products were size selected using SPRIse
lect (Beckman Coulter B23317) at a ratio of 0.6. Four second round PCR reactions were 
performed per sample, each reaction contained: 200 pg PCR product, 25 µl KAPA and 
Illumina tags (Additional File 1: Table S11). PCR was run with a maximum of 10 cycles, 
reactions were combined and 46 µl taken for SPRIselect purification again at a ratio of 
0.6. The purity and concentration of products was determined using a Bioanalyser (Agi
lent). Paired end sequencing was performed using Illumina HiSeq 2500 with the custom 
primers listed in Additional File 1: Table S11.
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 20 of 26
Screen data analysis
Analysis of CRISPR Screening data
Quantification and pre-processing.
Unaligned CRAMs were download from the ENA (project ERP145919) and quanti
f
ied using pyCROQUET version 1.5.1 (https:// github. com/ cance rit/ pycro quet) with the 
dual-guide subfunction, with -chunks 50,000 -b exact as non-default options. Paired 
guide counts were summarised by sample and collated into a count matrix. Sixty user
defined guide pairs with high read counts were removed prior to total normalisation by 
adding a pseudocount of five, dividing by the total reads mapped per sample and a scal
ing factor of 10 million. Fifty-one guides were removed with less than 20 reads per 10 
million in all control samples before calculating the normalised log2 fold changes.
Quality control and scaling
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient was used to assess the correlation between repli
cates while the null-normalised mean difference (NNMD) was used to measure the sep
aration between Essential and Non-essential single guide pairs.
Where:
μE is the mean of the single essential guides.
μNE is the mean of the single non-essential guide pairs.
σNE is the standard deviation of the single non-essential guide pairs.
Samples with a NNMD > −2 or R < 0.55 were excluded from further analysis: KP-1N 
R1 (Pancreas), COR-L23 R2 (Lung NSCLC), NCI-H1568 (Lung NSCLC), SK-MEL-5 
R1 (Melanoma), SK-MEL-28 R2 were excluded in addition to all three replicates from 
WM3702 (Melanoma) and COLO 792 (Melanoma).
Normalised log2 fold changes were scaled such that the median of the double safe
targeting guide pairs was zero and the median of the single essential guide pairs was −1.
Single gRNA analysis
Dual guide pairs, where both guides were gene-targeting (gene|gene) were excluded 
for the single guide analyses such that only single and control guide pairs were carried 
forward (gene|safe_targeting or safe_targeting|gene and safe_targeting|safe_target
ing, respectively). Scaled counts were compared to the mean of the controls to identify 
enriched and depleted genes using MAGeCK version 0.5.9.3 with the options –norm
method’none’ and –remove-zero’none’. Genes were classified as enriched with a posi
tive FDR < 0.05 and depleted with a negative FDR < 0.05. Scaled fold-changes were used 
to identify depleted genes using BAGEL2 version 2.0 build 114. Core essential (CEGv2) 
and non-essential (NEGv1) gene lists for BAGEL2 were sourced from the Hart Lab 
repository (https:// github. com/ hart- lab/ bagel, build 114), containing 684 and 927 genes 
respectively. For each dataset and cell line, scaled Bayes factors were calculated by sub
tracting the threshold calculated with the R pROC package such that genes considered 
as depleted had a scaled Bayes factor > 0. For each gene pair, the gene in position A (tar
getA) or position B (targetB) was classified as being ‘single_depleted’ if the gene in the 
relevant position had both a MAGeCK neg.fdr < 0.05 and a BAGEL2 scaled BF > 0.
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 21 of 26
Dual gRNA analysis
Within the library, a gene pair is comprised of guide pairs testing the interaction between 
two genes (geneA|geneB and geneB|geneA). These guide pairs are classified as:- singles—where one guide is gene-targeting and the other is safe-targeting (gene|safe_
targeting or safe_targeting|gene).- duals—where both guides are gene-targeting (gene|gene).- safe-targeting—where both guides are safe-targeting (safe_targeting|safe_targeting).
Within each sample, the observed fold changes were normalised by subtracting the 
median fold change of the singles. The Bliss independence model was used to calculate 
the expected combined effect of two genes being targeted simultaneously as follows:
Dual expected FC (g1g2) = Single observed FC (g1)—Single observed FC(g2).
where g1g2 represents the dual construct which contains two gene-targeting guides 
and g1 and g2 correspond to single constructs containing the same gene-targeting guides 
paired with a safe-targeting guide.
Using Loess regression, we modelled the relationship between predicted and observed 
fold changes to determine a gene interaction (GI) score (or residual) for each dual guide 
pair. As observed in Thompson et al., [11], variance was not equal across the model 
showing increased variance in gene pairs exhibiting greater lethal effects. To account for 
this heteroscedasticity, we applied variance smoothing. Dual guide pairs were ranked by 
their expected fold Changes and their residuals were placed into batches of 200 guide 
pairs. A normalised GI score (norm_gi) was then calculated by dividing each residual by 
the square root of its corresponding batch variance. For each gene pair, a t-test was per
formed using the pooled variance of the normalised GI scores, comparing the median 
normalised GI score of each gene pair to the overall median and applying Benjamini
Hochberg to control false discovery rates.
For each cell line, gene pairs with a mean normalised GI < −0.5 and FDR < 0.01 and 
significant by the Bassik method were taken forward. Furthermore, pairs were only clas
sified as hits if neither gene was categorised as’essential’by both BAGEL2 and MAGeCK 
(i.e. significantly depleted in both single-gene analyses).
Cell imaging
A549 cells were reverse transfected with a total of 50 nM siRNA using 0.2 µl Dharma
FECT 1 transfection reagent (Horizon Discovery T-2001–02) and seeded onto glass 
bottom plates (Grenier, 655,891). For each gene target four individual siRNA sequences 
were used, one per well. For dual knockdowns 25 nM siRNA against each target was 
combined, for single knockdown 25 nM targeting siRNA was combined with 25 nM 
safe-targeting control 1 siRNA.
After 72 h cells were treated with 10 µM EdU (Thermo Fisher C10639) and incubated 
at 37 °C for 2.5 h prior to treatment with 1 µg/ml Hoechst 33,342 and incubation for 
an addition 30 min. Cells were washed well with PBS and treated with Annexin V con
jugate 647 (Thermo Fisher A23204) at 1:10 dilution in 1 × Annexin binding buffer (BD 
Bioscience 556,454). After 15 min incubation cells were PBS washed and fixed with 4% 
paraformaldehyde for 15 min prior to permeabilization with 0.5% Triton® X-100 in PBS 
for 20 min. Cells were washed with 3% BSA and EdU detected by the addition of 50 µl of 
the Click-iT® Plus reaction cocktail (Thermo Fisher C10639) and incubation for 30 min. 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 22 of 26
Cells were blocked with 1% Goat serum and 3% BSA in PBS for 1 h and then incubated 
overnight at 4 °C with alpha tubulin antibody (Novus Biologicals NB100-690) 1:200 in 
3% BSA. Cells were washed well and incubated with goat anti-mouse 488 conjugated 
antibody (Thermo Fisher A-11001) for 4 h at room temperature. Cells were washed and 
incubated with CellMask™ Orange Actin Tracking Stain (Thermo Fisher A57244) at 
1:1000 for 15 min, prior to further washing and imaging using the Operetta CLS system 
from Perkin Elmer (now Revvity).
Imaging analysis
T
he median of all cell data was determined per well. Any wells with < = 10 analysed 
f
ield of view of less than 1000 cells per well were excluded. Initial scaling was under
taken to normalize the number of classified cells (proliferative, non-proliferative, apop
totic or enlarged) per well by replicate. This entailed calculating a per well scaling factor 
by dividing the number of classified objects per well by the total number of classified 
objects in all wells for the replicate (i.e. relative contribution). The number of objects 
classified as apoptotic, non-proliferative, proliferative, or enlarged was then divided by 
this factor. Any well containing less than 5% proliferating cells was excluded. To allow 
additional scaling by features, PCA plots were used to identify outlier control wells for 
removal, resulting in the exclusion of 6 control wells. In total, data from 4 independent 
replicates were taken forward for analysis.
Off‑target score calculation
We calculated on-target scores for single guides using CRISOT [60] with default argu
ments. To generate off-target scores, we first identified putative off-target sites using 
cas-offinder [61]. For each identified site, we calculated both MIT [62] and CFD [63] off
target scores using the crisprScore package [64] in R (v4.3.2) (Additional File 1: Table S1). 
T
he resulting site-wise scores from both methods correlated strongly (Pearson R = 0.96). 
Both on- and off-target scores were aggregated by taking the maximum score over all 
putative off-target sites, prioritizing sites with zero mismatches. The entire workflow 
was reproducibly implemented using snakemake. Guide sequences were aligned to the 
human reference genome assembly GRCh38.
Comparison of screen hits to gene expression data
For the analysis in Fig. 7 we compared the 117 screen hits described above to expres
sion data. More specifically, we identified genes that were ubiquitously expressed in nor
mal tissues with a TPM > 1 for both members of the pair in GTEx expression data. We 
also identified genes where in tumours there was loss of expression in tumours in the 
pan-cancer analysis of whole cancer genomes (PCAWG) dataset where there was loss 
of expression of one member of the pair but not the other. The data for normal tissues 
came from GTEx release E-MTAB-5200 and the tumour data from 1350 patients from 
PCAWG https:// dcc. icgc. org/ pcawg was re-analysed through the Expression Atlases 
standardised pipelines and normalised across samples by patient/individual and had the 
accession E-MTAB-5423.
To identify tissue specific genetic interactions, we used a Type II ANOVA analysis. The 
GI effect score for each pair was treated as a dependent variable in a separate one-way 
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 23 of 26
ANOVA tests, with cancer type as an independent categorical variable. We used the 
Benjamini–Hochberg approach [65] to correct for multiple hypothesis testing, with 
results considered significant at a false discovery rate of < 10%. To assess the relation
ship between mRNA abundance and either GI scores or individual gene effect scores, 
we used Pearson correlation. For each of the gene pairs identified as synthetic lethal in 
at least three cell lines, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficients between the 
mRNA expression levels of both genes in the pair and their corresponding GI scores. 
Additionally, we computed the correlation between the mRNA expression level of either 
gene and the gene effect score of its partner, in both directions. The significance of these 
correlations was determined by applying the Benjamini–Hochberg correction, with 
an FDR threshold of 10%. Data for this analysis was obtained from the DepMap portal 
(https:// depmap. org/ portal/), using the version 24Q2 Public dataset [66]. This included 
mRNA expression data (DepMap 24Q2 Public, OmicsExpressionProteinCodingGen
esTPMLogp1) and gene effect scores (DepMap 24Q2 Public, CRISPRGeneEffect) for 26 
cancer cell lines.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s13059‑ 025‑ 03737‑w.
Additional file1
Additional file2
Additional file3
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the cellular phenotyping facility at the Wellcome Sanger Institute with particular thanks to Adam 
Hunter, Verity Goodwin and Rebecca McRae for their invaluable assistance in performing the screens. We would also like 
to thank the cytometry facility, cancer ageing and somatic mutation (CASM) support lab and IT departments for mak
ing this study possible. In addition, we would like to thank Oscar Rueda, Sach Mukherjee and Dom Kirkham for helpful 
discussion. We thank Erika Wiseman for technical assistance/advice. We would also like to thank Dr. Ultan McDermott for 
making this study possible and his support throughout.
Peer review information
Wenjing She was the primary editor of this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration 
with the rest of the editorial team. The peer‑review history is available in the online version of this article.
Authors’ contributions
DJA: conceptualization, funding acquisition, writing and editing the paper. VH: experiments, project administration, data 
analysis, writing the original paper draft. VO, BG, DJA, IM, VI, DA, EG, NK, B.de.K, R.O‑L, LL, CR: formal analysis, software/
code/analysis of CRISPR screen sequencing data. TW, LF and EW generation and analysis of cell imaging data. Editing of 
text. VI, EG, SP, J.v.dH, B.de.K & CR: code for library target identification and analysis of CRISPR hits. DA: statistical analysis. 
N.A.T: methodology and library design. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This work was funded by an unrestricted research grant from AstraZeneca, the Wellcome Trust (220540/Z/20/A; Well
come Sanger Institute Quinquennial Review 2021–2026) and Cancer Research UK (EDDPGM‑Nov22/100004). EG work is 
supported by FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia), under projects UIDB/50021/2020 (https:// doi. org/ 10. 54499/ 
UIDB/ 50021/ 2020), SARC‑RON‑AI (https:// doi. org/ 10. 54499/ 2024. 07252. IACDC [doi.org], through RE‑C05‑i08.M04), and 
SYNTHESIS (https:// doi. org/ 10. 54499/ LISBO A2030‑ FEDER‑ 00868 200) [doi.org].
Data availability
**All of the code in the manuscript is available for download from Github** [67] **and is also available via the Zenodo 
repository** [49] **. Codes is released under an MIT license.** —Jupyter Notebooks are available for the combinatorial 
CRISPR screen analysis: [https://github.com/team113sanger/harle_dgCRISPR_paralogs/blob/develop/combinatorial_
crispr_screen_analysis/JupyterNotebooks](https:/github.com/team113sanger/harle_dgCRISPR_paralogs/blob/develop/
combinatorial_crispr_screen_analysis/JupyterNotebooks). These documents allow analysis directly from the raw data 
downloaded from the ENA (01_Data_Preparation.ipynb), through QC and downstream analyses and post‑processing.—
Scripts used in the Notebooks can be found here: [https://github.com/team113sanger/harle_dgCRISPR_paralogs/tree/
develop/combinatorial_crispr_screen_analysis/SCRIPTS](https:/github.com/team113sanger/harle_dgCRISPR_paralogs/
tree/develop/combinatorial_crispr_screen_analysis/SCRIPTS)—Data not in ENA (e.g. metadata) but too large to store 
in the repository can be found on Figshare[68]: [https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/A_compendium_of_synthetic_
lethal_gene_pairs_defined_by_extensive_combinatorial_pan‑cancer_CRISPR_screening/25954027](https:/figshare.
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 24 of 26
com/articles/dataset/A_compendium_of_synthetic_lethal_gene_pairs_defined_by_extensive_combinatorial_pan‑can
cer_CRISPR_screening/25954027)—Scripts for processing imaging data are here: https://github.com/team113sanger/
harle_dgCRISPR_paralogs/tree/develop/imaging_analysis The sequencing data generated from the CRISPR screens in 
this study are available from the European Nucleotide Archive under accession: PRJEB60853[69]. RNA transcriptome data 
(except C092) were downloaded from the Broad DepMap portal[66]. RNA‑Seq data for C092 is available from the Euro
pean Genome‑Phenome Archive (EGA) under accession: EGAS00001000815[70] and is managed by the Sanger Institute 
Data Access Committee (datasharing@sanger.ac.uk). All other data is available in the Supplementary information. Data 
from the TCGA[25,46], Zena Browser[45], GTEX[38] and SLKB[34] databases were obtained from those repositories.
Jupyter Notebooks are available for the combinatorial CRISPR screen analysis:https:// github. com/ team1 13san ger/ harle_ 
dgCRI SPR_ paral ogs/ blob/ devel op/ combi nator ial_ crispr_ screen_ analy sis/ Jupyt erNot ebooks. These documents allow 
analysis directly from the raw data downloaded from the ENA (01_Data_Preparation.ipynb), through QC and down
stream analyses and post‑processing.
Scripts used in the Notebooks can be found here:https:// github. com/ team1 13san ger/ harle_ dgCRI SPR_ paral ogs/ tree/ 
devel op/ combi nator ial_ crispr_ screen_ analy sis/ SCRIP TS
Data not in ENA (e.g. metadata) but too large to store in the repository can be found on Figshare [68]: https:// figsh are. 
com/ artic les/ datas et/A_ compe ndium_ of_ synth etic_ lethal_ gene_ pairs_ defin ed_ by_ exten sive_ combi nator ial_ pan‑ 
cancer_ CRISPR_ scree ning/ 25954 027
Scripts for processing imaging data are here: https:// github. com/ team1 13san ger/ harle_ dgCRI SPR_ paral ogs/ tree/ devel 
op/ imagi ng_ analy sis
The sequencing data generated from the CRISPR screens in this study are available from the European Nucleotide 
Archive under accession: PRJEB60853 [69]. RNA transcriptome data (except C092) were downloaded from the Broad 
DepMap portal [66]. RNA‑Seq data for C092 is available from the European Genome‑Phenome Archive (EGA) under 
accession: EGAS00001000815 [70] and is managed by the Sanger Institute Data Access Committee (datasharing@sanger.
ac.uk). All other data is available in the Supplementary information.
Data from the TCGA [25, 46], Zena Browser [45], GTEX [38] and SLKB [34] databases were obtained from those 
repositories.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All cell lines used in this study were ethically sourced from the American Type Culture Collection except for CO92 cells 
which were obtained from Prof. Nick Hayward (QIMR Berghofer) with informed consent of the patient. Mouse experi
ments at the Wellcome Sanger Institute were performed with Home Office Approval and following approval by the 
Sanger Animal Welfare Committee.
Competing interests
SP consults for Relation Therapeutics on studies unrelated to this work. No other authors declare competing interests.
Received: 27 July 2024   Accepted: 11 August 2025
References
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Nijman SMB. Synthetic lethality: general principles, utility and detection using genetic screens in human cells. FEBS 
Lett. 2011;585:1–6.
Prakash R, Zhang Y, Feng W, Jasin M. Homologous recombination and human health: the roles of BRCA1, BRCA2, 
and associated proteins. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2015;7:a016600.
Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ, Tutt ANJ, Johnson DA, Richardson TB, et al. Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA 
mutant cells as a therapeutic strategy. Nature. 2005;434:917–21.
Langelier M‑F, Lin X, Zha S, Pascal JM. Clinical PARP inhibitors allosterically induce PARP2 retention on DNA. Sci Adv. 
2023;9:eadf7175.
Dempster JM, Pacini C, Pantel S, Behan FM, Green T, Krill‑Burger J, et al. Agreement between two large pan‑cancer 
CRISPR‑Cas9 gene dependency data sets. Nat Commun. 2019;10:5817.
Boehm JS, Garnett MJ, Adams DJ, Francies HE, Golub TR, Hahn WC, et al. Cancer research needs a better map. 
Nature. 2021;589:514–6.
Kegel BD, Ryan CJ. Paralog dispensability shapes homozygous deletion patterns in tumor genomes. Mol Syst Biol. 
2023;19:e11987.
Kegel BD, Ryan CJ. Paralog buffering contributes to the variable essentiality of genes in cancer cell lines. PLoS Genet. 
2019;15:e1008466.
Dede M, McLaughlin M, Kim E, Hart T. Multiplex enCas12a screens detect functional buffering among paralogs 
otherwise masked in monogenic Cas9 knockout screens. Genome Biol. 2020;21:262.
10. Shen JP, Zhao D, Sasik R, Luebeck J, Birmingham A, Bojorquez‑Gomez A, et al. Combinatorial CRISPR–Cas9 screens 
for de novo mapping of genetic interactions. Nat Methods. 2017;14:573–6.
11. Thompson NA, Ranzani M, van der Weyden L, Iyer V, Offord V, Droop A, et al. Combinatorial CRISPR screen identifies 
f
itness effects of gene paralogues. Nat Commun. 2021;12:1302.
12. Parrish PCR, Thomas JD, Gabel AM, Kamlapurkar S, Bradley RK, Berger AH. Discovery of synthetic lethal and tumor 
suppressor paralog pairs in the human genome. Cell Rep. 2021;36:109597.
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 25 of 26
13. Gonatopoulos‑Pournatzis T, Aregger M, Brown KR, Farhangmehr S, Braunschweig U, Ward HN, et al. Genetic interac
tion mapping and exon‑resolution functional genomics with a hybrid Cas9–Cas12a platform. Nat Biotechnol. 
2020;38:638–48.
14. Ito T, Young MJ, Li R, Jain S, Wernitznig A, Krill‑Burger JM, et al. Paralog knockout profiling identifies DUSP4 and 
DUSP6 as a digenic dependence in MAPK pathway‑driven cancers. Nat Genet. 2021;53:1664–72.
15. Kegel BD, Quinn N, Thompson NA, Adams DJ, Ryan CJ. Comprehensive prediction of robust synthetic lethality 
between paralog pairs in cancer cell lines. Cell Syst. 2021;12:1144‑1159.e6.
16. Ryan CJ, Mehta I, Kebabci N, Adams DJ. Targeting synthetic lethal paralogs in cancer. Trends Cancer. 2023;9:397–409.
17. Anvar NE, Lin C, Ma X, Wilson LL, Steger R, Sangree AK, et al. Efficient gene knockout and genetic interaction screen
ing using the in4mer CRISPR/Cas12a multiplex knockout platform. Nat Commun. 2024;15:3577.
18. Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, Laversanne M, Soerjomataram I, Jemal A, et al. Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN 
estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2021;71:209–49.
19. Long GV, Swetter SM, Menzies AM, Gershenwald JE, Scolyer RA. Cutaneous melanoma. Lancet. 2023;402:485–502.
20. Lyne R, Smith R, Rutherford K, Wakeling M, Varley A, Guillier F, et al. FlyMine: an integrated database for Drosophila 
and Anopheles genomics. Genome Biol. 2007;8:R129–R129.
21. Davis P, Zarowiecki M, Arnaboldi V, Becerra A, Cain S, Chan J, et al. WormBase in 2022—data, processes, and tools for 
analyzing Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics. 2022;220:iyac003.
22. Thanki AS, Soranzo N, Haerty W, Davey RP. Geneseqtofamily: a Galaxy workflow to find gene families based on the 
Ensembl Compara GeneTrees. Gigascience. 2018;7:giy005.
23. Behan FM, Iorio F, Picco G, Gonçalves E, Beaver CM, Migliardi G, et al. Prioritization of cancer therapeutic targets 
using CRISPR–Cas9 screens. Nature. 2019;568:511–6.
24. Cho H, Berger B, Peng J. Compact Integration of Multi‑Network Topology for Functional Analysis of Genes. Cell Syst. 
2016;3:540–548 e5. Available from: https:// www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ pubmed/ 27889 536
25. Chang K, Creighton CJ, Davis C, Donehower L, Drummond J, Wheeler D, et al. The Cancer Genome Atlas Pan‑Cancer 
analysis project. Nat Genet. 2013;45:1113–20.
26. Cheung HW, Cowley GS, Weir BA, Boehm JS, Rusin S, Scott JA, et al. Systematic investigation of genetic vulner
abilities across cancer cell lines reveals lineage‑specific dependencies in ovarian cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2011;108:12372–7.
27. Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim S, et al. The cancer cell line encyclopedia 
enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012;483:603–7.
28. Fortin J‑P, Tan J, Gascoigne KE, Haverty PM, Forrest WF, Costa MR, et al. Multiple‑gene targeting and mismatch toler
ance can confound analysis of genome‑wide pooled CRISPR screens. Genome Biol. 2019;20:21.
29. Koike‑Yusa H, Li Y, Tan E‑P, Velasco‑Herrera MDC, Yusa K. Genome‑wide recessive genetic screening in mammalian 
cells with a lentiviral CRISPR‑guide RNA library. Nat Biotechnol. 2013;32(3):267–73.
30. Morgens DW, Wainberg M, Boyle EA, Ursu O, Araya CL, Tsui CK, et al. Genome‑scale measurement of off‑target activ
ity using Cas9 toxicity in high‑throughput screens. Nat Commun. 2017;8:15178.
31. Kim E, Hart T. Improved analysis of CRISPR fitness screens and reduced off‑target effects with the BAGEL2 gene 
essentiality classifier. Genome Med. 2021;13:2.
32. Bliss CI. The toxicity of poisons applied jointly1. Ann Appl Biol. 1939;26:585–615.
33. Li W, Xu H, Xiao T, Cong L, Love MI, Zhang F, et al. MAGeCK enables robust identification of essential genes from 
genome‑scale CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screens. Genome Biol. 2014;15:554.
34. Gökbağ B, Tang S, Fan K, Cheng L, Yu L, Zhao Y, et al. SLKB: synthetic lethality knowledge base. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2023. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ nar/ gkad8 06.
35. Köferle A, Schlattl A, Hörmann A, Spreitzer F, Popa A, Thatikonda V, et al. Interrogation of cancer gene depend
encies reveals novel paralog interactions of autosome and sex chromosome encoded genes. bioRxiv. 
2021;39:2021.05.21.445116.
36. Malone CF, Dharia NV, Kugener G, Forman AB, Rothberg MV, Abdusamad M, et al. Selective modulation of a pan
essential protein as a therapeutic strategy in cancer. Cancer Discov. 2021;11:2282–99.
37. Krill‑Burger JM, Dempster JM, Borah AA, Paolella BR, Root DE, Golub TR, et al. Partial gene suppression improves 
identification of cancer vulnerabilities when CRISPR‑Cas9 knockout is pan‑lethal. Genome Biol. 2023;24:192.
38. Lonsdale J, Thomas J, Salvatore M, Phillips R, Lo E, Shad S, et al. The Genotype‑Tissue Expression (GTEx) project. Nat 
Genet. 2013;45:580–5.
39. Consortium TIMP, Meehan TF, Conte N, West DB, Jacobsen JO, Mason J, et al. Disease model discovery from 3,328 
gene knockouts by the International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium. Nat Genet. 2017;49:1231–8.
40. Groza T, Gomez FL, Mashhadi HH, Muñoz‑Fuentes V, Gunes O, Wilson R, et al. The International Mouse Phenotyping 
Consortium: comprehensive knockout phenotyping underpinning the study of human disease. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2022;51:D1038–45.
41. Chen S, Francioli LC, Goodrich JK, Collins RL, Kanai M, Wang Q, et al. A genomic mutational constraint map using 
variation in 76,156 human genomes. Nature. 2023;1–11.
42. Sondka Z, Dhir NB, Carvalho‑Silva D, Jupe S, Madhumita, McLaren K, et al. COSMIC: a curated database of somatic 
variants and clinical data for cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023;52:D1210‑7.
43. Kelleher KJ, Sheils TK, Mathias SL, Yang JJ, Metzger VT, Siramshetty VB, et al. Pharos 2023: an integrated resource for 
the understudied human proteome. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022;51:D1405–16.
44. Zorova LD, Popkov VA, Plotnikov EY, Silachev DN, Pevzner IB, Jankauskas SS, et al. Mitochondrial membrane poten
tial. Anal Biochem. 2018;552:50–9.
45. Goldman MJ, Craft B, Hastie M, Repečka K, McDade F, Kamath A, et al. Visualizing and interpreting cancer genomics 
data via the Xena platform. Nat Biotechnol. 2020;38:675–8.
46. Campbell PJ, Getz G, Korbel JO, Stuart JM, Jennings JL, Stein LD, et al. Pan‑cancer analysis of whole genomes. Nature. 
2020;578:82–93.
47. Tutt ANJ, Garber JE, Kaufman B, Viale G, Fumagalli D, Rastogi P, et al. Adjuvant olaparib for patients with BRCA1‑ or 
BRCA2‑mutated breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:2394–405.
Harle et al. Genome Biology            
Page 26 of 26
48. Chan EM, Shibue T, McFarland JM, Gaeta B, Ghandi M, Dumont N, et al. WRN helicase is a synthetic lethal target in 
microsatellite unstable cancers. Nature. 2019;568:551–6.
49. Harle V, Offord V, Gökbağ B, Fotopoulos L, Williams T, Alexander D, Mehta I, Thompson NA, Olvera‑León R, Peidli S, 
Iyer V, Gonçalves E, Kebabci N, de Kegel B, van de Haar J, Li L, Ryan C, Adams DJ. A compendium of synthetic lethal 
gene pairs defined by extensive combinatorial pan‑cancer CRISPR screening. Zenodo. https:// zenodo. org/ recor ds/ 
15827 201 (2025).
50. Tsherniak A, Vazquez F, Montgomery PG, Weir BA, Kryukov G, Cowley GS, et al. Defining a cancer dependency map. 
Cell. 2017;170:564‑576.e16.
51. Beroukhim R, Getz G, Nghiemphu L, Barretina J, Hsueh T, Linhart D, et al. Assessing the significance of chromosomal 
aberrations in cancer: methodology and application to glioma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104:20007–12.
52. Mohr SE, Hu Y, Kim K, Housden BE, Perrimon N. Resources for functional genomics studies in Drosophila mela
nogaster. Genetics. 2014;197:1–18.
53. Sanson KR, Hanna RE, Hegde M, Donovan KF, Strand C, Sullender ME, et al. Optimized libraries for CRISPR‑Cas9 
genetic screens with multiple modalities. Nat Commun. 2018;9:5416.
54. Hart T, Tong AHY, Chan K, Leeuwen JV, Seetharaman A, Aregger M, et al. Evaluation and Design of Genome‑Wide 
CRISPR/SpCas9 Knockout Screens. G3: Genes Genomes Genet. 2017;7:2719–27.
55. Wang T, Wei JJ, Sabatini DM, Lander ES. Genetic screens in human cells using the CRISPR‑Cas9 system. Science. 
2014;343:80–4.
56. Chan PY, Alexander D, Mehta I, Matsuyama LSAS, Harle V, Olvera‑León R, et al. The synthetic lethal interaction 
between CDS1 and CDS2 is a vulnerability in uveal melanoma and across multiple tumor types. Nat Genet. 
2025;57:1672–83.
57. Vidigal JA, Ventura A. Rapid and efficient one‑step generation of paired gRNA CRISPR‑Cas9 libraries. Nat Commun. 
2015;6:8083.
58. Masters JR. Cell‑line authentication: end the scandal of false cell lines. Nature. 2012;492:186.
59. Tzelepis K, Koike‑Yusa H, De Braekeleer E, Li Y, Metzakopian E, Dovey OM, et al. A CRISPR Dropout Screen Identifies 
Genetic Vulnerabilities and Therapeutic Targets in Acute Myeloid Leukemia. Cell Rep. 2016;17:1193–205.
60. Chen Q, Chuai G, Zhang H, Tang J, Duan L, Guan H, et al. Genome‑wide CRISPR off‑target prediction and optimiza
tion using RNA‑DNA interaction fingerprints. Nat Commun. 2023;14:7521.
61. Bae S, Park J, Kim J‑S. Cas‑OFFinder: a fast and versatile algorithm that searches for potential off‑target sites of Cas9 
RNA‑guided endonucleases. Bioinformatics. 2014;30:1473–5.
62. Hsu PD, Scott DA, Weinstein JA, Ran FA, Konermann S, Agarwala V, et al. DNA targeting specificity of RNA‑guided 
Cas9 nucleases. Nat Biotechnol. 2013;31:827–32.
63. Doench JG, Fusi N, Sullender M, Hegde M, Vaimberg EW, Donovan KF, et al. Optimized sgRNA design to maximize 
activity and minimize off‑target effects of CRISPR‑Cas9. Nat Biotechnol. 2016;34:184–91.
64. Hoberecht L, Perampalam P, Lun A, Fortin J‑P. A comprehensive Bioconductor ecosystem for the design of CRISPR 
guide RNAs across nucleases and technologies. Nat Commun. 2022;13:6568.
65. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. 
J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol. 1995;57:289–300.
66. DepMap B. DepMap 24Q2 Public. 2024; Available from: https:// plus. figsh are. com/ artic les/ datas et/ DepMap_ 24Q2_ 
Public/ 25880 521
67. Harle V, Offord V, Gökbağ B, Fotopoulos L, Williams T, Alexander D, Mehta I, Thompson NA, Olvera‑León R, Peidli S, 
Iyer V, Gonçalves E, Kebabci N, de Kegel B, van de Haar J, Li L, Ryan C, Adams DJ. A compendium of synthetic lethal 
gene pairs defined by extensive combinatorial pan‑cancer CRISPR screening. Github. https:// github. com/ team1 
13san ger/ harle_ dgCRI SPR_ paral ogs/ (2025).
68. Harle V, Offord V, Gökbağ B, Fotopoulos L, Williams T, Alexander D, Mehta I, Thompson NA, Olvera‑León R, Peidli S, 
Iyer V, Gonçalves E, Kebabci N, de Kegel B, van de Haar J, Li L, Ryan C, Adams DJ. A compendium of synthetic lethal 
gene pairs defined by extensive combinatorial pan‑cancer CRISPR screening. 2024. Figshare. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
6084/ m9. figsh are. 25954 027. v4.
69. Harle V, Offord V, Gökbağ B, Fotopoulos L, Williams T, Alexander D, Mehta I, Thompson NA, Olvera‑León R, Peidli S, 
Iyer V, Gonçalves E, Kebabci N, de Kegel B, van de Haar J, Li L, Ryan C, Adams DJ. A compendium of synthetic lethal 
gene pairs defined by extensive combinatorial pan‑cancer CRISPR screening. ENA. https:// www. ebi. ac. uk/ ena/ 
brows er/ view/ PRJEB 60853 (2023).
70. Harle V, Offord V, Gökbağ B, Fotopoulos L, Williams T, Alexander D, Mehta I, Thompson NA, Olvera‑León R, Peidli S, 
Iyer V, Gonçalves E, Kebabci N, de Kegel B, van de Haar J, Li L, Ryan C, Adams DJ. A compendium of synthetic lethal 
gene pairs defined by extensive combinatorial pan‑cancer CRISPR screening. EGA. https:// ega‑ archi ve. org/ datas ets/ 
EGAD0 00010 03244 (2017).
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.